# October 14th 2021

- [Installing the Gentoo installation files](https://wiki.gentoo.org/wiki/Handbook:AMD64/Installation/Stage)
- [Installing the Gentoo base system](https://wiki.gentoo.org/wiki/Handbook:AMD64/Installation/Base)

In the previous meeting we followed the "Downloading the stage tarball" section.
We used the `links` command to browse the Gentoo mirror list to find a stage tarball to download.

`links`: links is a a non-graphical, menu-driven browser that always you to surf the Gentoo mirror list from your command-line.

## Unpacking the stage tarball

We used tar to unpack the stage tarball:
Before unpacking the tarball move it to the the `/mnt/gentoo` directory with the following command:
`mv stage3* /mnt/gentoo`

`* ` tries to extract everything.

To unpack the tarball type:

```bash
tar xpvf stage3-*.tar.xz --xattrs-include='*.*'--numeric-owner*
```

- The `x` in `xpvf` stands for extract.
- The `p` stands for preserve permissions
- The `f` is used to denote that we want to extract a file (not standard input).

`--xattrs-include='*.*'` is to include preservation of the the extended attributes in all namespaces stored in the archive.

`--numeric-owner` is used to ensure that the user and group IDs of the files being extracted from the tarball will remain the same as Gentoo's release engineering team intended.

`gz` = gzip which is a type of compression

`tar` stands for **tape archive**

The **mnt** folder
A directory that is intended for use as a temporary mount point. It will mount devices intended for storage like a CDROM or USB. It is a standard subdirectory of the root directory.
For more information see the [/mnt page](http://www.linfo.org/mnt.html) on The Linux Foundation Project.

### Lost+found folder

Every hard drive or partition that is mounted will contain its own lost+found folder.
It is used for system recovery.

For example, if your system shuts down unexpectedly some of the files may be corrupted. When your system boots up again there are file system checks that happen. These checks will try to recover corrupt files. These files may not be able to be recovered if they are broken. You can go in to the lost+found folder to see if the corrupted files that are stored there can be recovered.

## Configuring compile options

For optimization you can set a couple variables that impact the behavior of Gentoo's package manager **Portage**.

You can use nano or vim to edit the make.conf file where you will set the variables.

Type: nano -w /mnt/gentoo/etc/portage/make.conf
or vi -w /mnt/gentoo/etc/portage/make.conf for vim

**Example CFLAGS and CXXFLAGS variables**

```bash
# Compiler flags to set for all languages
COMMON_FLAGS="-march=native -O2 -pipe"
# Use the same settings for both variables
CFLAGS="${COMMON_FLAGS}"
CXXFLAGS="${COMMON_FLAGS}"
```

You can also set the MAKEOPTS variable. This variable defines how many parallel compilations occur when installing a package.
**Example MAKEOPTS declaration in make.conf**

```bash
MAKEOPTS="-j2"
```

## Installing the base system

https://wiki.gentoo.org/wiki/Handbook:AMD64/Installation/Base

## Selecting mirrors

Portage will look in the make.conf file for the GENTOO_MIRRORS variable and use the mirrors listed therein.
We ill use a tool called mirrorselect that gives users a nice interface to select mirrors.

`mirrorselect -i -o >> /mnt/gentoo/etc/portage/make.conf`

**Note:** Once you navigate to the mirror of choice press the `spacebar` to select the mirror. You can select more than one mirror.

## Gentoo ebuild repository

The Gentoo ebuild repository contains information needed to update the package repository. The package repository is a collection os ebuilds and related files.
To configure the repository you will need to create a repos.conf directory:
`mkdir --parents /mnt/gentoo/etc/portage/repos.conf`

Then copy the Gentoo repository configuration file to the repos.conf directory:
`cp /mnt/gentoo/usr/share/portage/config/repos.conf /mnt/gentoo/etc/portage/repos.conf/gentoo.conf`

## Copy DNS

Before entering the new development you need to copy over the DNS information to make sure that networking still works after entering the new environment. To copy DNS type:

`cp --dereference /etc/resolv.conf /mnt/gentoo/etc/`

the `--dereference` option is used to ensure if /etc/resolv.conf is a symbolic link, that the link's target file is copied instead of the symbolic link itself.

## Mounting the necessary filesystems

To make the new environment work you need to mount the following filesystems:
`mount --types proc /proc /mnt/gentoo/proc`
`mount --rbind /sys /mnt/gentoo/sys`
`mount --make-rslave /mnt/gentoo/sys`
`mount --rbind /dev /mnt/gentoo/dev`
`mount --make-rslave /mnt/gentoo/dev`
`mount --bind /run /mnt/gentoo/run`
`mount --make-slave /mnt/gentoo/run`

## Entering the new environment

To enter the new environment you will use chroot. This will change the root from the current installation to the installation system.
**chroot = change root**
To chroot you will need to do the following three steps:

`chroot /mnt/gentoo /bin/bash`
`source /etc/profile`
`export PS1="(chroot) ${PS1}"`

In step one, the root location is changed from `/` to `/mnt/gentoo`
The second step reloads some settings in memory.
The last step changes the primary prompt to help you remember that the session is inside the chroot environment.
